[DOC-321] Disk full scenarios (#24101)
yugabyte/yugabyte-db: docs/content/preview/troubleshoot/nodes/disk-full.md

---
title: Disk full
linkTitle: Disk full
headerTitle: Disk full issue
description: Learn how to address YugaByteDB node data drive full issues
menu:
  preview:
    parent: troubleshoot-nodes
    weight: 40
type: docs
---

This document describes the potential consequences and recommended actions when a YB-TServer or YB-Master encounters disk full conditions on the data drives.

## Overview

YugabyteDB data drive doesn't rely on the local root file system for storing data. Instead, YugabyteDB data directories are typically mounted on separate file systems to ensure isolation and manageability.

> The following flags are used to configure the data drive:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following Master and TServer flags are used to configure the location of the data drives:
```

- [fs_data_dirs](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#fs-data-dirs)
- [log_dir](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#log-dir)

If any of the data drives is approaching disk full condition, then the inserts, updates, or deletes that write to the tablet are rejected due to insufficient disk space, and they would fail with the following error:

```output
IO error (yb/tserver/tablet_service.cc:2288): Write to tablet 749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f rejected. Node 9a24d9c8493b44caa97ba4ae06e5829d has insufficient disk space
```

> The flags `max_disk_throughput_mbps` and `reject_writes_min_disk_space_mb` determine the amount of disk space that is considered too low. The default value is 3GB.

Reviewer 2: Include the hyperlink to the gflags - max_disk_throughput_mbps - https://docs.yugabyte.com/preview/reference/configuration/all-flags-yb-master/#max-disk-throughput-mbps 

and reject_writes_min_disk_space_mb - https://docs.yugabyte.com/preview/reference/configuration/all-flags-yb-master/#reject-writes-min-disk-space-mb

> The YB-TServer logs contain the following message when the system nears the threshold (18GB):

Reviewer: 18GB? Isn't it 3? Or is this some other threshold?
The '3518698209 bytes' in the example is closer to 3 than 18

Author: I thought 3GB is the space that is considered too low and you’re right, the output does mention around 3GB~ as the remaining free space. @hari90 can you clarify ?

Reviewer: So just remove the 18GB reference

```output
W0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2186] Low disk space on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001. Free space: 3518698209 bytes
```

and the following message when there is no more space left:

```output
0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2181] Not enough disk space available on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001. Free space: 3518698209 bytes
```

> The following options prevents YSQL/YCQL writes from consuming additional disk space:

Reviewer 2: If the data drive is running short of disk space, use one of the following to stop the writes from failing.

> 0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2181] Not enough disk space available on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001. Free space: 3518698209 bytes

Reviewer: same number of bytes in this 'no space' example as in the 'low space' example above

Author: I think we have to remove the free space bit. The output in the KB article also has to be changed - https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/29778392325005-Write-to-tablet-rejected-due-to-insufficient-disk-space . cc @hari90

> If the data drive is running short of disk space, use one of the following options to stop the writes from failing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## What to do when a drive is running low

If the data drive is running short of disk space, use one of the following options to stop the writes from failing.
```

When dropping YSQL tables, ensure the YB-Master has enough disk space, as this involves updating the YSQL catalog tables.

### Disable database features that require more disk space

The following features require more disk space. You can disable or turn these features off to reclaim space on the nodes.

- Time-to-live (TTL)
- Point-in-time recovery (PITR)
- xCluster
- Change Data Capture (CDC)

### Run manual compaction

YugabyteDB automatically compacts data to keep the database running efficiently and reduce disk use. Certain operations, like bulk load of data or deleting a large number of rows, can cause a temporary spike in disk usage. If waiting for the automatic compaction task is not an option, you can manually run the compaction task using the following commands:

- [Compact individual tables](../../../admin/yb-admin/#compact-table)
- [Compact individual tablets](../../../admin/yb-ts-cli/#compact-tablet)

Note that regardless of the above options, it is possible that some other activity on the node (such as remote bootstrap) can end up taking up more space and use up the space on the disk.

> The following sections describe the disk full scenarios and the recommended recovery actions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> ## Scenarios

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Drive full scenarios
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

The following sections describe disk full scenarios and the recommended recovery actions.

```

### The drive containing the log file is full

> The process is unable to create new log files at tablet bootstrap time, and this can be identified by looking at the `/var/log/messages` files. This results in YB-TServer or YB-Master crash loop.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the Master or TServer are unable to create new log files at tablet bootstrap time, they can enter a crash loop.

You can identify this by looking at the `/var/log/messages` files [for what? can we have an example log message]
```

> ### Disk full situation on other data drives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Data drive is full
```

> During the tablet bootstrap that takes place during a YB-TServer restart, a new WAL file is allocated, irrespective of the amount of logs generated in the server's previous WAL file. If a YB-TServer has several tablets and results in a crash loop, each one of the tablets creates new WAL files on every bootstrap, filling up the disk. The process is unable to create new log files at tablet bootstrap time, and this can be identified by looking at the `/var/log/messages` files.

Reviewer 2: You can remove "During the tablet bootstrap that takes place during a YB-TServer restart, a new WAL file is allocated, irrespective of the amount of logs generated in the server's previous WAL file. If a YB-TServer has several tablets and results in a crash loop, each one of the tablets creates new WAL files on every bootstrap, filling up the disk."

#### Crash loop due to write I/O error

If the disk isn't completely full (it probably has a few KBs of disk space left), the YB-TServer can successfully bootstrap. However, a subsequent write operation might fail with a fatal/crash error due to the disk getting full. This can lead to a continuous crash loop as the server restarts and encounters the same issue all over again.

> An example IO error is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion

An example I/O error is as follows:
```

```output
consensus_queue.cc:368] Check failed: _s.ok() Bad status: IO error (yb/util/env_posix.cc:504): /mnt/d1/yb-data/tserver/wals/table-6e527d21c179455286ae94ddcbebd267/tablet-be46450d80d049ee8b6a0780dfa54926/.tmp.newsegmentiS4vyN: No space left on device (system error 28)
```

#### Automatic YB-TServer blacklisting

During YB-TServer startup, the FSManager (File System Manager) module checks the health of each data drive by creating a small test file. If the disk is completely full, the YB-TServer does the following:

> 1. Skips the full drive: The test file creation fails, the node ignores this particular data drive, and marks it faulty. It also increments the `drive_fault` metric.

Reviewer 2: Fix the numbering - 1, 2, 3

Author: Oh it is correct currently. It is a markdown standard. The list will render as 1,2,3 finally.

**Option 1**: Increase the disk volume size using the [Edit Universe](../../../yugabyte-platform/manage-deployments/edit-universe/#edit-a-universe) option. Note the following important considerations:

- Preflight checks - YugabyteDB Anywhere performs preflight checks to ensure a smooth [smart resize](../../../yugabyte-platform/manage-deployments/edit-universe/#smart-resize) operation. One of the checks verifies there is no leaderless tablet in the cluster. To bypass this check, you can disable the `yb.checks.leaderless_tablets.enabled` global [runtime configuration flag](../../../yugabyte-platform/administer-yugabyte-platform/manage-runtime-config/) as a Super Admin user.

- Master leader - The universe needs to have a designated master leader node to receive and process node resize requests. If no master leader is available, the resize operation will fail. After the disk space is successfully increased, the bootstrap process for the resized nodes should proceed without issues.

**Option 2**: Add a new node using the [Edit Universe](../../../yugabyte-platform/manage-deployments/edit-universe/#edit-a-universe) option.

> Note that in a cluster with a [replication factor](../../../architecture/docdb-replication/replication/#replication-factor) (RF) of N, if more than N/2 nodes fail, adding a new node will fail. To recover from this situation, you need to bring some failed nodes back online (using Option 1 or Option 2) to form a quorum, and then add new nodes. If that's not possible, you might need to manually perform an unsafe configuration change.

Reviewer: "bring some failed nodes back online (using Option 1 or Option 2)" - option 2 is add a new node, but in this situation "adding a new node will fail"

Reviewer: "unsafe configuration change" - what is that? like what?

```

and the following message when there is no more space left:

```output
0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2181] Not enough disk space available on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001.
```

## What to do when a drive is running low

If the data drive is running short of disk space, use one of the following options to stop the writes from failing.

### Increase capacity

Scale the cluster to increase capacity. You can do this in two ways:

- Scale up

   Switch to bigger machines or add more storage disks. If you are using YugabyteDB Anywhere, follow the instructions in [Expanding universe node disk capacity with YugabyteDB Anywhere](https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/5463616207757-Expanding-universe-node-disk-capacity-with-YugabyteDB-Anywhere-platform).

- Scale out

    Add more nodes to the cluster. The YugabyteDB load balancer will rebalance the tablets and the data across the added nodes.

### Remove unnecessary files from the nodes

Unnecessary files can accumulate on the nodes, including large log files or older core dumps.

> Do not modify or remove the YugabyteDB data, bin, or config directories and files. Damage or loss of these files can result in unavailability and data loss.

Reviewer 3: Lets mark this as a WARNING message

- Time-to-live (TTL)
- Point-in-time recovery (PITR)
- xCluster
- Change Data Capture (CDC)

### Run manual compaction

YugabyteDB automatically compacts data to keep the database running efficiently and reduce disk use. Certain operations, like bulk load of data or deleting a large number of rows, can cause a temporary spike in disk usage. If waiting for the automatic compaction task is not an option, you can manually run the compaction task using the following commands:

- [Compact individual tables](../../../admin/yb-admin/#compact-table)
- [Compact individual tablets](../../../admin/yb-ts-cli/#compact-tablet)

Note that regardless of the above options, it is possible that some other activity on the node (such as remote bootstrap) can end up taking up more space and use up the space on the disk.

## Drive full scenarios

The following sections describe disk full scenarios and the recommended recovery actions.

### The drive containing the log file is full

If the Master or TServer are unable to create new log files at tablet bootstrap time, they can enter a crash loop.

> You can identify this by looking at the `/var/log/messages` files [for what? can we have an example log message]

Reviewer 3: this needs to be fixed

Reviewer: This was a suggestion with a question - hoping to get an answer...

The YB-TServer logs contain the following message when the system nears the threshold (18GB):

```output
W0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2186] Low disk space on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001. Free space: 3518698209 bytes
```

and the following message when there is no more space left:

```output
0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2181] Not enough disk space available on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001. Free space: 3518698209 bytes
```

## Issue

### Write to tablet rejected due to insufficient disk space

In YugabyteDB {{<release "2024.1.0.0">}} and later, insert, update, or delete to tables fail due to insufficient disk space with the following error:

```output
IO error (yb/tserver/tablet_service.cc:2288): Write to tablet 749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f rejected. Node 9a24d9c8493b44caa97ba4ae06e5829d has insufficient disk space
```

## Recommended recovery actions

> **Option 1**: Increase capacity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Option 1: Increase capacity
```

YugabyteDB allows you to expand the cluster in an online manner. There are two ways to scale the cluster:

- Scale up

>     You can scale up by switching to bigger machines, or by adding more storage disks. If you are using YugabyteDB Anywhere, follow the instructions in [expanding universe node disk capacity with YugabyteDB Anywhere](https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/5463616207757-Expanding-universe-node-disk-capacity-with-YugabyteDB-Anywhere-platform)

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    You can scale up by switching to bigger machines, or by adding more storage disks. If you are using YugabyteDB Anywhere, follow the instructions in [Expanding universe node disk capacity with YugabyteDB Anywhere](https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/5463616207757-Expanding-universe-node-disk-capacity-with-YugabyteDB-Anywhere-platform).
```

- Scale out

>     You can scale out by adding more nodes to the cluster. This will cause the YugabyteDB load balancer to rebalance the tablets and the data across more nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

    You can scale out by adding more nodes to the cluster. This will cause the YugabyteDB load balancer to rebalance the tablets and the data across more nodes.
```

> **Option 2**: Remove unnecessary files from the nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Option 2: Remove unnecessary files from the nodes
```

> Sometimes, unnecessary files can accumulate on the nodes including, large log files, or older core dumps.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unnecessary files can accumulate on the nodes, including large log files or older core dumps.
```

Do not modify or remove the YugabyteDB data, bin, or config directories and files. Damage or loss of these files can result in unavailability and data loss.

> **Option 3** Drop unnecessary tables and databases/namespaces

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Option 3: Drop unnecessary tables and databases/namespaces
```

Dropping large tables, YSQL databases, or YCQL namespaces that are no longer necessary will help recover disk space.

> When dropping tables on a database/namespace with [Point-in-time recovery](../../../manage/backup-restore/point-in-time-recovery/) enabled, the tables will be set in a HIDDEN state. It will not be cleaned up until all its snapshot schedules have expired.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When dropping tables on a database/namespace with [Point-in-time recovery](../../../manage/backup-restore/point-in-time-recovery/) enabled, the tables will be set in a HIDDEN state and won't be cleaned up until all their snapshot schedules have expired.
```

> Dropping YSQL tables require the YB-Master to have sufficient disk space, as it involves updating the YSQL catalog tables.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When dropping YSQL tables, ensure the YB-Master has enough disk space, as this involves updating the YSQL catalog tables.
```

> **Option 4** Disable database features that require more disk space

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Option 4: Disable database features that require more disk space
```

> The following features result in more disk space usage. You can disable or turn these features off to reclaim space on the nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following features require more disk space. You can disable or turn these features off to reclaim space on the nodes.
```

- Time-to-live (TTL)
- Point-in-time recovery (PITR)
- xCluster
- Change Data Capture (CDC)

> **Option 5** Run manual compaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
##### Option 5: Run manual compaction
```

> YugabyteDB performs automatic compaction of the data to keep the database running efficiently, and reduce disk space. Certain operations like bulk load of data, or deleting a large number of rows can cause a temporary spike in disk usage. If waiting for the automatic compaction task is not an option, then you can manually run the compaction task using the following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
YugabyteDB automatically compacts data to keep the database running efficiently and reduce disk use. Certain operations, like bulk load of data or deleting a large number of rows, can cause a temporary spike in disk usage. If waiting for the automatic compaction task is not an option, you can manually run the compaction task using the following commands:
```

The YB-TServer logs contain the following message when the system nears the threshold (18GB):

```output
W0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2186] Low disk space on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001. Free space: 3518698209 bytes
```

and the following message when there is no more space left:

```output
0829 15:35:51.325239 1986375680 log.cc:2181] Not enough disk space available on yb-data/tserver/wals/table-7457ebcd745e4ea89375a30406f2c188/tablet-749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f/wal-000000001. Free space: 3518698209 bytes
```

## Issue

### Write to tablet rejected due to insufficient disk space

In YugabyteDB {{<release "2024.1.0.0">}} and later, insert, update, or delete to tables fail due to insufficient disk space with the following error:

```output
IO error (yb/tserver/tablet_service.cc:2288): Write to tablet 749e4d78244c43d2bba9cdb8505b732f rejected. Node 9a24d9c8493b44caa97ba4ae06e5829d has insufficient disk space
```

## Recommended recovery actions

##### Option 1: Increase capacity

> YugabyteDB allows you to expand the cluster in an online manner. There are two ways to scale the cluster:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Scale the cluster to increase capacity. You can do this in two ways:
```

- Scale up

>     You can scale up by switching to bigger machines, or by adding more storage disks. If you are using YugabyteDB Anywhere, follow the instructions in [Expanding universe node disk capacity with YugabyteDB Anywhere](https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/5463616207757-Expanding-universe-node-disk-capacity-with-YugabyteDB-Anywhere-platform).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Switch to bigger machines or add more storage disks. If you are using YugabyteDB Anywhere, follow the instructions in [Expanding universe node disk capacity with YugabyteDB Anywhere](https://support.yugabyte.com/hc/en-us/articles/5463616207757-Expanding-universe-node-disk-capacity-with-YugabyteDB-Anywhere-platform).
```

- Scale out

>     You can scale out by adding more nodes to the cluster. This will cause the YugabyteDB load balancer to rebalance the tablets and the data across more nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Add more nodes to the cluster. The YugabyteDB load balancer will rebalance the tablets and the data across the added nodes.
```

##### Option 2: Remove unnecessary files from the nodes

Unnecessary files can accumulate on the nodes, including large log files or older core dumps.

Do not modify or remove the YugabyteDB data, bin, or config directories and files. Damage or loss of these files can result in unavailability and data loss.

##### Option 3: Drop unnecessary tables and databases/namespaces

Dropping large tables, YSQL databases, or YCQL namespaces that are no longer necessary will help recover disk space.

> When dropping tables on a database/namespace with [Point-in-time recovery](../../../manage/backup-restore/point-in-time-recovery/) enabled, the tables will be set in a HIDDEN state and won't be cleaned up until all their snapshot schedules have expired.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When dropping tables on a database/namespace with [Point-in-time recovery](../../../manage/backup-restore/point-in-time-recovery/) enabled, the tables are set to a HIDDEN state and won't be cleaned up until all their snapshot schedules have expired.
```

title: Disk Full
linkTitle: Disk Full
headerTitle: Disk Full issue
description: Learn how to address YugaByteDB node data drive full issues
menu:
  preview:
    parent: troubleshoot-nodes
    weight: 40
type: docs
---

This document describes the potential consequences and recommended actions when a YB-TServer or YB-Master encounters disk full conditions on the data drives. The consequence of data drive full depends on whether the full data drive stores YB-TServer or YB-Master log files.

YugabyteDB data drive doesn't rely on the local root file system for storing data. Instead, YugaByteDB data directories are typically mounted on separate file systems to ensure isolation and manageability.

The following flags are used to configure the data drive:

- [fs_data_dirs](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#fs-data-dirs)
- [log_dir](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#log-dir)

## Scenarios

### The drive containing the log file is full

> During the tablet bootstrap that takes place during a YB-TServer restart, a new WAL file is allocated, irrespective of the amount of logs generated in the server's previous WAL file. If a YB-TServer has several tablets and results in a crash loop, each one of the tablets creates new WAL files on every bootstrap, filling up the disk.

Reviewer 2: Also, some of statements below need to be modified to take into account recent changes from Hari - https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/issues/22430 and https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/issues/23373

If a tablet's last WAL file size is less than or equal to this threshold value, the bootstrap process will reuse the last WAL file rather than create a new one. To set the flag so that the last WAL file is always reused, you can set the flag to the current maximum WAL file size (64MB), as follows:

```sh
reuse_unclosed_segment_threshold_bytes=67108864
```

The following two options are recommendations specific to [YugabyteDB Anywhere](../../../yugabyte-platform/).

**Option 3**: Increase the disk volume size through YugabyteDB Anywhere [edit universe](../../../yugabyte-platform/manage-deployments/edit-universe/#edit-a-universe) UI. Note that there are a few important considerations:

- Preflight checks : YugabyteDB Anywhere UI performs preflight checks to ensure a smooth [smart resize](../../../yugabyte-platform/manage-deployments/edit-universe/#smart-resize) operation. One of the checks verifies there is no leaderless tablet in the cluster. To bypass this check, you can disable the [runtime Global Configuration flag](../../../yugabyte-platform/administer-yugabyte-platform/manage-runtime-config/) `yb.checks.leaderless_tablets.enabled` as a Super Admin user.

> - Master leader requirement: A designated master leader node is essential within the YugabyteDB Anywhere universe to receive and process node resize requests. If no master leader is available, the resize operation will fail. After the disk space is successfully increased, the bootstrap process for the resized nodes should proceed without issues.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Master leader - The universe needs to have a designated master leader node to receive and process node resize requests. If no master leader is available, the resize operation will fail. After the disk space is successfully increased, the bootstrap process for the resized nodes should proceed without issues.
```

> **Option 4**: Add a new node through YugabyteDB Anywhere [edit universe](../../../yugabyte-platform/manage-deployments/edit-universe/#edit-a-universe) UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Option 4**: Add a new node using the [Edit Universe](../../../yugabyte-platform/manage-deployments/edit-universe/#edit-a-universe) option.
```

> Note that in a cluster with a [replication factor](../../../architecture/docdb-replication/replication/#replication-factor) (RF) of N, if more than N/2 nodes fail, adding a new node operation will fail. To recover from this situation, you need to bring some failed nodes back online (using Option 1, Option 2, or Option 3) to form the quorum first, and then add new nodes. If that's not possible, you might need to manually perform an unsafe configuration change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that in a cluster with a [replication factor](../../../architecture/docdb-replication/replication/#replication-factor) (RF) of N, if more than N/2 nodes fail, adding a new node will fail. To recover from this situation, you need to bring some failed nodes back online (using Option 1, Option 2, or Option 3) to form a quorum, and then add new nodes. If that's not possible, you might need to manually perform an unsafe configuration change.
```

{{<warning title="Important: Accidental Disk Unmount">}}

> During internal testing (refer to GitHub issue [#22120](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/issues/22120)), it was identified that that accidentally unmounting a YugaByteDB data disk can potentially lead to data inconsistencies and cause the YB-TServer to enter a crash loop state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Internal testing (refer to GitHub issue [#22120](https://github.com/yugabyte/yugabyte-db/issues/22120)) identified that accidentally unmounting a YugaByteDB data disk can potentially lead to data inconsistencies and cause the YB-TServer to enter a crash loop.
```

- [fs_data_dirs](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#fs-data-dirs)
- [log_dir](../../../reference/configuration/yb-tserver/#log-dir)

> ## Disk full scenarios on data drives

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Data disk full scenarios
```
